It's all about Hooks.
Now if you're already familiar with React,
you're familiar with Hooks.
But for those of you aren't this is
quite an important section because
React Hooks are basically how you do
anything asynchronist in reaction.
How you save state,
it's how you do callbacks,
it's how you do anything that's dynamic,
and if you're gonna use function
components instead of class components,
you will have to use Hooks.
Hooks actually quite a recent addition.
They've only been in React maybe a year,
but everyone's using them and so are we.
Now there are quite a few built in Hooks,
but generally the main ones that
you need to know about are useState,
useCallback and useEffect.
And I'm going to go through
each of these in turn.
UseState is for saving and
updating state inside your component.
You will import it from
React not React Native.
They work exactly the same in React
as you do in React Native by the way.
So you import it from React, and the way
to use it is inside a function component.
So this you can't use in a class
component and you cause can't use it
outside a component, so this has to be
inside a component before the return.
And what we do here is we call
useState with an initial value, so
in this case the initial value is zero and
it returns an array of two items.
So here we use the array destructuring,
and the first
item which returns is the value, so
this is the current value of the state and
the second argument, so the second thing
it returns is a function to set the value.
Now there's two ways to set the value,
you can either pass in a function,
which takes the current value, and
then you can use the current value
to set the next value, or you can
just simply set device directly without
any reference to the current value.
I added a little example, just to
illustrate the useState [INAUDIBLE].
This takes a little while to warm up
I might just launch this on
my phone it might be quicker
All right, so this is a little
counter application that I wrote.
This is what it looks like on my phone.
So there's nothing special going on here.
We've got a counter at the top left,
and we've got 2 buttons for
increment and decrement.
So when I tap on increment, it goes up.
When I tap on decrement,
it goes down, so classic counter.
I'm not going to do a to do list,
I promise, and
let's look at the code for this.
Here I've used the use state from react.
I've set the default values as zero,
and I'm using count and set count.
Notice that in my example here,
I used value and set value.
This is because it doesn't matter
what you name them, it's up to you.
So you can have as many
useSates as you want.
Now, as far as the code goes,
I have just a text that displays
the current account and then two buttons.
I have one for increment and
one for decrement.
For this, I have an onPress handler, and
both of these use the setCount,
which was a second argument from useState.
And both of these use the current
value and either increment or
decrement it,
those that if I was to change this to
lots of nines, then my starting
value would be lots of nines.
And if I just deleted it all together,
I think oops.
If I delete it all together,
there would be no value.
I think it wouldn't even work because,
yeah,
it would be a NaN because it's
trying to add 1 to undefined.
Right, so next up we have useCallback.
useCollback is used for
any actions you may want to perform be
it a state update, a network request, or
launching a modal.
You don't have to use useCallback always,
but
is quite handy to know and
in most of the applications that I worked
at we tend to migrate all of our
side effect in to useCallbacks.
So looking at the country example that
we had before, We would like to, yeah,
so currently in that country example,
we have the onPress handlers inline.
So look at here yesterday inline, which is
kind of fine because it's just a country,
it just says do one thing, but
it's not really great because
if we had a longer on press, so instead,
we kind of want to extract those
into constant functions, like so.
So now we have handle increment and
handle decrement, which we can pass in.
Now this works with the problem
is that the way React works
is every time there is
a change either inside or
outside the component,
this component gets a re render.
So everything inside the components
gets recalculated, so
especially if you were doing something
complex inside here, this will get rerun
every single time you do, like anything
you are related in your application.
This is why you might
want to use useCallback.
So instead of what we can do is we can put
this exact function inside a useCallback.
So if you notice that this and
this are exactly the same.
To use callback basically
takes two arguments.
The first, is the function
that you want to execute, and
the second is an array of variables.
So here we use an empty array.
What this array of variables does is, it
basically tells you when you
should recalculate this function.
So especially this is only
used if you use something
outside of what's already here,
if that makes sense.
So if I was to use any okay,
I will again show an example.
All right, so okay, so this actually
works in here, this is great.
Right, so here I've got a count and
a setCount.
And I created a callback for
handleIncrement and
I created a callback for
handleDecrement, so this works.
And this works because I've
used the current value for
set count, but what if I just use this
if I did this to be counted plus one,
instead of the current value plus one.
So now if I incremented it, no matter how
often I increment it, it's still one.
And that's because I'm
using this count variable.
And this gets cached, and in order for
this function to get re-executed,
then anything that you use
inside this function that
you want to make sure it's reflected,
you have to add them here in the array.
So now if I add count to this array and
I start incrementing that
increment works again.
So that's why hooks are really handy and
really powerful, but
it's really easy to make
mistakes like that.
In general, if you have a hook and
things aren't updating like looking
whether you're passing everything
you need to interdependencies array
is a good place to start debugging.
The last hook that we're going
to look at is called useEffects.
If you're already familiar with React,
like React components then use effect is
comparable to componented mounts,
and componented updates.
It's basically tied to
the component lifecycle.
It gets run generally when
the component is initially mounted,
and another part of it gets run
when the component is unmounted.
You would use this for example,
when you want to subscribe to something
during the converted life cycle, and
you could also use it if you wanted
to do some action based on the properties.
Or if you wanted to do
some action just once
when the component is initially rendered.
So here's an example, for a ChatAPI.
So this is a effect that is run once,
when the component is mounted.
And this is a ChatAPI,
we subscribe to messages.
And when the component gets mounted,
this gets run, so you subscribe.
I noticed that useEffect
actually returns a function.
It doesn't always return a function,
but it's may.
And this is basically the cleanup
part of the useEffect.
If you do something in useEffect
that has a potential for
a memory leak, for example,
subscribing to something
you should also add a cleanup
function which undoes that effect.
In this case, we subscribe to the friend
status when the component is launched.
And then when the component is unmounted,
we unsubscribed from friend status.
All of these functions, you can have
as many useEffects as you want.
And all of these get run when
the component is removed to an estate.
And the other thing you might use it for
is if you just want to do an action, well,
once or multiple times, actually.
So in this case,
notice that it has a dependencies array,
this action gets run just once.
And you need to make
sure that you pass this,
otherwise it gets run every
time the componentry renders.
If you pass the parameter here, for
example, this action would be run
whenever that parameter changes.
Let's look at an example.
All right, so
I have to use my phone for this,
because the network request doesn't
work for the in browser version.
Cool, so basically what I'm doing
here is I am fetching some cat
facts from a public cat facts API.
And I've got a state parameter
here I've got useState.
Which stores all the facts, so
I'm using a facts to solve the array and
I've got a set facts for
updating the array.
I'm gonna start with an empty array.
Now I'm going to have a useCallback.
And now have a useCallback which
basically does the net request.
So a little bit hard to see here because
everything's open and I can't close it.
Okay.
So here I'm going to use call back.
I'm doing an asynchronous call and
this is the entire call.
I'm going to fetch from this API and
then I'm going to get
the Jason from the cat facts, and
then I'm going to set the facts here.
And finally we've got a useEffect,
and this is run when the component
is initially launched and
is going to call this function.
Now, the reason that I
had to do a useCallback,
rather than doing all the fetching
stuff in here is because you can't do
asynchronous things in a useEffect.
You can in a use effect you can trigger
functions that are asynchronous, but
this itself, if I tried to do this,
it would just tell me no, it wouldn't run.
And the other thing to notice that
is that I said, so look at what
my screen is that you need to be wary of
making sure you remember to pass this in.
So let's see what happens if I don't pass
this then, you see that it just loads,
and loads, and loads, and loads for
requests and keys auto updating.
That is because it gets rerun every
time the component is rendered, and
the component gets rendered
every time something changes.
So this will get triggered to get to this,
which fetches this,
which sets the fact and then this
causes the component to re-render and
you end up with an infinite loop.
So you need to be quite
careful in using these.